docs/semantic.md, before:

# semantic.rs

## Overview

The `semantic.rs` module extracts semantic tokens from ForgeScript code and converts them to LSP format for syntax highlighting in editors. It provides intelligent highlighting based on function metadata validation and supports multi-color function highlighting.

## Token Type Mapping

LSP semantic token types (as defined in `server.rs`):

| Index | Type | Description | Examples |
|-------|------|-------------|----------|
| 0 | FUNCTION | Normal functions | `$ping`, `$ban` |
| 1 | KEYWORD | Booleans, semicolons | `true`, `false`, `;` |
| 2 | NUMBER | Numeric literals | `123`, `45.67` |
| 3 | PARAMETER | Alternating function color | `$random` (when multi-color enabled) |
| 4 | STRING | Escape function content | Content inside `$esc[...]` |
| 5 | COMMENT | Comments | `$c[This is a comment]` |

## Main Function

### `extract_semantic_tokens_with_colors`

Public API for semantic token extraction:

```rust
pub fn extract_semantic_tokens_with_colors(
    source: &str,                        // Source code
    use_function_colors: bool,           // Enable multi-color highlighting
    manager: Arc<MetadataManager>,       // Function metadata
) -> Vec<SemanticToken>
```

**Process:**
1. Extract code blocks from `code:` sections
2. For each code block, call `extract_tokens_from_code`
3. Convert absolute tokens to relative LSP format
4. Return semantic tokens for the entire document

### `extract_highlight_ranges`

Extracts highlight ranges for VS Code decorations:

```rust
pub fn extract_highlight_ranges(
    source: &str,
    function_colors: &[String],
    manager: &Arc<MetadataManager>,
) -> Vec<(usize, usize, String)>
```

**Process:**
1. Similar to `extract_tokens_from_code`, scans code blocks
2. Identifies function ranges
3. Assigns colors from `function_colors` in a round-robin fashion
4. Returns absolute character offsets and hex color strings

**Note:** This feature uses editor decorations, not semantic tokens. Colors are applied at runtime and override theme colors.

## Code Block Extraction

Similar to parser, extracts ForgeScript from backtick-delimited blocks:

```rust
while i < bytes.len() {
    if &source[i..i + 5] == "code:" {
        // Skip whitespace
        // Find opening backtick
        // Extract until closing backtick (handling \` escapes)
        let code = &source[content_start..j];
        let tokens = extract_tokens_from_code(code, content_start, ...);
    }
}
```

**Why Extract?**
- ForgeScript code is embedded in `code:` blocks in Discord bot files
- Only content within backticks should be highlighted
- Prevents highlighting of non-code text

## Token Extraction

### `extract_tokens_from_code`

Core tokenization logic:

```rust
fn extract_tokens_from_code(
    code: &str,
    code_start: usize,                   // Offset in original document
    use_function_colors: bool,
    manager: Arc<MetadataManager>,
) -> Vec<(usize, usize, u32)>           // (start, end, token_type)
```

**Token Format:**
- `(start, end, token_type)` - Absolute byte offsets and type index
- Offsets adjusted by `code_start` for document coordinates

## Special Function Detection

### Comment Functions: `$c[...]`

```rust
if c == b'$' && bytes[i + 1] == b'c' && bytes[i + 2] == b'[' {
    if let Some(end_idx) = find_matching_bracket_raw(bytes, i + 2) {
        // Highlight entire $c[...] as type 5 (COMMENT)
        found.push((i + code_start, end_idx + 1 + code_start, 5));
        i = end_idx + 1;
        continue;
    }
}
```

**Why Raw Bracket Matching?**
- Comment content should be treated as literal
- No need to handle escape sequences inside comments
- Faster execution

### Escape Functions: `$esc[...]`, `$escapeCode[...]`

```rust
if let Some(esc_end) = check_escape_function(bytes, i) {
    // Highlight function name as type 0 (FUNCTION)
    found.push((i + code_start, name_end + code_start, 0));
    // Highlight content as type 4 (STRING)
    found.push((name_end + code_start, esc_end + code_start, 4));
    // Highlight closing bracket as type 0 (FUNCTION)
    found.push((esc_end + code_start, esc_end + 1 + code_start, 0));
}
```

**Three-Part Highlighting:**
1. Function name (`$esc` or `$escapeCode`) → FUNCTION
2. Bracket content → STRING (escaped text)
3. Closing bracket → FUNCTION

### `check_escape_function`

Detects escape functions and returns closing bracket position:

```rust
fn check_escape_function(bytes: &[u8], dollar_idx: usize) -> Option<usize> {
    // Skip $ and modifiers (!, #)
    // Check for "esc[" or "escapeCode["
    // Return closing bracket position using raw matching
}
```

## Metadata-Based Function Highlighting

### Incremental Matching Algorithm

```rust
// Try incremental matching against metadata
let mut best_match_len = 0;
let mut j = i + 1;

// Skip modifiers (!, #)
while j < bytes.len() && (bytes[j] == b'!' || bytes[j] == b'#') {
    j += 1;
}

// Try matching character by character
while j < bytes.len() && (bytes[j].is_ascii_alphanumeric() || bytes[j] == b'_') {
    let candidate = &code[i..=j];
    if manager.get(candidate).is_some() {
        best_match_len = j - i + 1;  // Update best match
    }
    j += 1;
}
```

**Key Points:**
- Only highlights functions that exist in metadata
- Ensures `$pingMS` doesn't partially highlight as `$ping`
- Supports modifiers: `$!ban`, `$#if`

**Example:**
- Input: `$pingserver`
- Check: `$p`, `$pi`, `$pin`, `$ping` ✓, `$pings`, `$pingse`, ...
- If only `$ping` in metadata → highlight `$ping` only (4 chars)
- If `$pingserver` in metadata → highlight all 12 chars

### Multi-Color Function Support

When `use_function_colors` is enabled:

```rust
let token_type = if use_function_colors {
    let colors = [0, 3];  // Alternate between FUNCTION and PARAMETER
    let color = colors[(function_color_index as usize) % colors.len()];
    function_color_index += 1;
    color
} else {
    0  // All functions use type 0 (FUNCTION)
};
```

**Visual Effect:**
```forgescript
$function1[...]  // Color 0 (FUNCTION)
$function2[...]  // Color 3 (PARAMETER)
$function3[...]  // Color 0 (FUNCTION)
```

Helps distinguish different functions visually.

## Other Token Types

### Numbers

```rust
if c.is_ascii_digit() {
    let start = i;
    while i < bytes.len() && (bytes[i].is_ascii_digit() || bytes[i] == b'.') {
        i += 1;
    }
    found.push((start + code_start, i + code_start, 2));  // Type 2 (NUMBER)
}
```

Supports: `123`, `45.67`, `0.5`

### Booleans

```rust
if &code[i..i + 4] == "true" {
    found.push((i + code_start, i + 4 + code_start, 1));  // Type 1 (KEYWORD)
    i += 4;
}
if &code[i..i + 5] == "false" {
    found.push((i + code_start, i + 5 + code_start, 1));  // Type 1 (KEYWORD)
    i += 5;
}
```

### Semicolons

```rust
if c == b';' && !is_char_escaped(bytes, i) {
    found.push((i + code_start, i + 1 + code_start, 1));  // Type 1 (KEYWORD)
}
```

Only unescaped semicolons (not `\\;`).

## Escape Character Handling

### `is_char_escaped`

Same logic as parser's `is_escaped`:

```rust
fn is_char_escaped(bytes: &[u8], idx: usize) -> bool {
    // For backtick: 1 backslash → escaped
    // For special chars ($, ;, [, ]): 2 backslashes → escaped
}
```

**Why Important:**
- `\\$function` should NOT be highlighted as a function
- `\\;` should NOT be highlighted as a keyword
- Ensures highlighting matches actual parsing behavior

## LSP Token Conversion

### `to_relative_tokens`

Converts absolute byte offsets to LSP's relative delta format:

```rust
fn to_relative_tokens(found: &[(usize, usize, u32)], source: &str) -> Vec<SemanticToken> {
    let mut last_line = 0u32;
    let mut last_col = 0u32;

    for &(start, end, token_type) in found {
        let start_pos = offset_to_position(source, start);
        let end_pos = offset_to_position(source, end);

        let delta_line = start_pos.line.saturating_sub(last_line);
        let delta_start = if delta_line == 0 {
            start_pos.character.saturating_sub(last_col)
        } else {
            start_pos.character
        };

        tokens.push(SemanticToken {
            delta_line,      // Lines since last token
            delta_start,     // Columns since last token (or from line start)
            length: (end_pos.character - start_pos.character).max(1),
            token_type,
            token_modifiers_bitset: 0,
        });

        last_line = start_pos.line;
        last_col = start_pos.character;
    }
}
```

**LSP Format:**
- Tokens are relative to previous token position
- First token relative to document start (0, 0)
- Reduces data transmission size

### `offset_to_position`

Converts byte offset to line/character position:

```rust
fn offset_to_position(text: &str, offset: usize) -> Position {
    let mut line = 0u32;
    let mut col = 0u32;

    for (i, ch) in text.char_indices() {
        if i >= offset { break; }
        if ch == '\n' {
            line += 1;
            col = 0;
        } else {
            col += 1;
        }
    }

    Position::new(line, col)
}
```

**Character-Based:**
- Uses `char_indices()` for UTF-8 safety
- Counts characters, not bytes (LSP requirement)
- Handles multi-byte characters correctly

## Performance Considerations

1. **Single Pass:** Code scanned once per change
2. **Sorted Output:** Tokens sorted by start position
3. **Early Exit:** Special functions detected early
4. **No Regex:** Direct byte comparisons for speed
5. **SmallVec Opportunity:** Could use SmallVec for token buffer

## Integration with Server

Called from `server.rs::semantic_tokens_full`:

```rust
let use_colors = *self.multiple_function_colors.read().unwrap();
let mgr = self.manager.read().unwrap().clone();
let tokens = extract_semantic_tokens_with_colors(text, use_colors, mgr);

Ok(Some(SemanticTokensResult::Tokens(SemanticTokens {
    result_id: None,
    data: tokens,
})))
```

## Example Highlighting

Input:
```forgescript
code: `$ping[example.com]$c[This is a comment]`
```

Tokens Generated:
```
$ping         → (0, 5, 0)   FUNCTION
example.com   → (not highlighted)
$c[...]       → (21, 47, 5) COMMENT
```

Visual Result:
- `$ping` in function color
- `[example.com]` in default color
- `$c[This is a comment]` in comment color

Commit message:

feat(lsp): Enrich function docs and add consistent highlighting
Enhance hover and completion documentation by displaying signature,
description, examples, and dynamic links to GitHub source and
external documentation. Show originating extension in completion
item detail. Implement consistent function highlighting, ensuring
the same function always receives the same color. Populate
`extension` and `source_url` in function metadata and update
server configuration for these new options.

docs/semantic.md, after:

# semantic.rs

## Overview

The `semantic.rs` module extracts semantic tokens from ForgeScript code and converts them to LSP format for syntax highlighting in editors. It provides intelligent highlighting based on function metadata validation and supports multi-color function highlighting.

## Token Type Mapping

LSP semantic token types (as defined in `server.rs`):

| Index | Type | Description | Examples |
|-------|------|-------------|----------|
| 0 | FUNCTION | Normal functions | `$ping`, `$ban` |
| 1 | KEYWORD | Booleans, semicolons | `true`, `false`, `;` |
| 2 | NUMBER | Numeric literals | `123`, `45.67` |
| 3 | PARAMETER | Alternating function color | `$random` (when multi-color enabled) |
| 4 | STRING | Escape function content | Content inside `$esc[...]` |
| 5 | COMMENT | Comments | `$c[This is a comment]` |

## Main Function

### `extract_semantic_tokens_with_colors`

Public API for semantic token extraction:

```rust
pub fn extract_semantic_tokens_with_colors(
    source: &str,                        // Source code
    use_function_colors: bool,           // Enable multi-color highlighting
    manager: Arc<MetadataManager>,       // Function metadata
) -> Vec<SemanticToken>
```

**Process:**
1. Extract code blocks from `code:` sections
2. For each code block, call `extract_tokens_from_code`
3. Convert absolute tokens to relative LSP format
4. Return semantic tokens for the entire document

### `extract_highlight_ranges`

Extracts highlight ranges for VS Code decorations:

```rust
pub fn extract_highlight_ranges(
    source: &str,
    function_colors: &[String],
    consistent_colors: bool,
    manager: &Arc<MetadataManager>,
) -> Vec<(usize, usize, String)>
```

**Process:**
1. Similar to `extract_tokens_from_code`, scans code blocks
2. Identifies function ranges
3. **Consistent Highlighting:**
   - If `consistent_colors` is `true`, uses a cache to ensure the same function name always gets the same color.
   - If `false`, assigns colors in a round-robin (random-like) fashion.
4. Returns absolute character offsets and hex color strings

**Note:** This feature uses editor decorations, not semantic tokens. Colors are applied at runtime and override theme colors.

## Code Block Extraction

Similar to parser, extracts ForgeScript from backtick-delimited blocks:

```rust
while i < bytes.len() {
    if &source[i..i + 5] == "code:" {
        // Skip whitespace
        // Find opening backtick
        // Extract until closing backtick (handling \` escapes)
        let code = &source[content_start..j];
        let tokens = extract_tokens_from_code(code, content_start, ...);
    }
}
```

**Why Extract?**
- ForgeScript code is embedded in `code:` blocks in Discord bot files
- Only content within backticks should be highlighted
- Prevents highlighting of non-code text

## Token Extraction

### `extract_tokens_from_code`

Core tokenization logic:

```rust
fn extract_tokens_from_code(
    code: &str,
    code_start: usize,                   // Offset in original document
    use_function_colors: bool,
    manager: Arc<MetadataManager>,
) -> Vec<(usize, usize, u32)>           // (start, end, token_type)
```

**Token Format:**
- `(start, end, token_type)` - Absolute byte offsets and type index
- Offsets adjusted by `code_start` for document coordinates

## Special Function Detection

### Comment Functions: `$c[...]`

```rust
if c == b'$' && bytes[i + 1] == b'c' && bytes[i + 2] == b'[' {
    if let Some(end_idx) = find_matching_bracket_raw(bytes, i + 2) {
        // Highlight entire $c[...] as type 5 (COMMENT)
        found.push((i + code_start, end_idx + 1 + code_start, 5));
        i = end_idx + 1;
        continue;
    }
}
```

**Why Raw Bracket Matching?**
- Comment content should be treated as literal
- No need to handle escape sequences inside comments
- Faster execution

### Escape Functions: `$esc[...]`, `$escapeCode[...]`

```rust
if let Some(esc_end) = check_escape_function(bytes, i) {
    // Highlight function name as type 0 (FUNCTION)
    found.push((i + code_start, name_end + code_start, 0));
    // Highlight content as type 4 (STRING)
    found.push((name_end + code_start, esc_end + code_start, 4));
    // Highlight closing bracket as type 0 (FUNCTION)
    found.push((esc_end + code_start, esc_end + 1 + code_start, 0));
}
```

**Three-Part Highlighting:**
1. Function name (`$esc` or `$escapeCode`) → FUNCTION
2. Bracket content → STRING (escaped text)
3. Closing bracket → FUNCTION

### `check_escape_function`

Detects escape functions and returns closing bracket position:

```rust
fn check_escape_function(bytes: &[u8], dollar_idx: usize) -> Option<usize> {
    // Skip $ and modifiers (!, #)
    // Check for "esc[" or "escapeCode["
    // Return closing bracket position using raw matching
}
```

## Metadata-Based Function Highlighting

### Incremental Matching Algorithm

```rust
// Try incremental matching against metadata
let mut best_match_len = 0;
let mut j = i + 1;

// Skip modifiers (!, #)
while j < bytes.len() && (bytes[j] == b'!' || bytes[j] == b'#') {
    j += 1;
}

// Try matching character by character
while j < bytes.len() && (bytes[j].is_ascii_alphanumeric() || bytes[j] == b'_') {
    let candidate = &code[i..=j];
    if manager.get(candidate).is_some() {
        best_match_len = j - i + 1;  // Update best match
    }
    j += 1;
}
```

**Key Points:**
- Only highlights functions that exist in metadata
- Ensures `$pingMS` doesn't partially highlight as `$ping`
- Supports modifiers: `$!ban`, `$#if`

**Example:**
- Input: `$pingserver`
- Check: `$p`, `$pi`, `$pin`, `$ping` ✓, `$pings`, `$pingse`, ...
- If only `$ping` in metadata → highlight `$ping` only (4 chars)
- If `$pingserver` in metadata → highlight all 12 chars

### Multi-Color Function Support

When `use_function_colors` is enabled:

```rust
let token_type = if use_function_colors {
    let colors = [0, 3];  // Alternate between FUNCTION and PARAMETER
    let color = colors[(function_color_index as usize) % colors.len()];
    function_color_index += 1;
    color
} else {
    0  // All functions use type 0 (FUNCTION)
};
```

**Visual Effect:**
```forgescript
$function1[...]  // Color 0 (FUNCTION)
$function2[...]  // Color 3 (PARAMETER)
$function3[...]  // Color 0 (FUNCTION)
```

Helps distinguish different functions visually.

## Other Token Types

### Numbers

```rust
if c.is_ascii_digit() {
    let start = i;
    while i < bytes.len() && (bytes[i].is_ascii_digit() || bytes[i] == b'.') {
        i += 1;
    }
    found.push((start + code_start, i + code_start, 2));  // Type 2 (NUMBER)
}
```

Supports: `123`, `45.67`, `0.5`

### Booleans

```rust
if &code[i..i + 4] == "true" {
    found.push((i + code_start, i + 4 + code_start, 1));  // Type 1 (KEYWORD)
    i += 4;
}
if &code[i..i + 5] == "false" {
    found.push((i + code_start, i + 5 + code_start, 1));  // Type 1 (KEYWORD)
    i += 5;
}
```

### Semicolons

```rust
if c == b';' && !is_char_escaped(bytes, i) {
    found.push((i + code_start, i + 1 + code_start, 1));  // Type 1 (KEYWORD)
}
```

Only unescaped semicolons (not `\\;`).

## Escape Character Handling

### `is_char_escaped`

Same logic as parser's `is_escaped`:

```rust
fn is_char_escaped(bytes: &[u8], idx: usize) -> bool {
    // For backtick: 1 backslash → escaped
    // For special chars ($, ;, [, ]): 2 backslashes → escaped
}
```

**Why Important:**
- `\\$function` should NOT be highlighted as a function
- `\\;` should NOT be highlighted as a keyword
- Ensures highlighting matches actual parsing behavior

## LSP Token Conversion

### `to_relative_tokens`

Converts absolute byte offsets to LSP's relative delta format:

```rust
fn to_relative_tokens(found: &[(usize, usize, u32)], source: &str) -> Vec<SemanticToken> {
    let mut last_line = 0u32;
    let mut last_col = 0u32;

    for &(start, end, token_type) in found {
        let start_pos = offset_to_position(source, start);
        let end_pos = offset_to_position(source, end);

        let delta_line = start_pos.line.saturating_sub(last_line);
        let delta_start = if delta_line == 0 {
            start_pos.character.saturating_sub(last_col)
        } else {
            start_pos.character
        };

        tokens.push(SemanticToken {
            delta_line,      // Lines since last token
            delta_start,     // Columns since last token (or from line start)
            length: (end_pos.character - start_pos.character).max(1),
            token_type,
            token_modifiers_bitset: 0,
        });

        last_line = start_pos.line;
        last_col = start_pos.character;
    }
}
```

**LSP Format:**
- Tokens are relative to previous token position
- First token relative to document start (0, 0)
- Reduces data transmission size

### `offset_to_position`

Converts byte offset to line/character position:

```rust
fn offset_to_position(text: &str, offset: usize) -> Position {
    let mut line = 0u32;
    let mut col = 0u32;

    for (i, ch) in text.char_indices() {
        if i >= offset { break; }
        if ch == '\n' {
            line += 1;
            col = 0;
        } else {
            col += 1;
        }
    }

    Position::new(line, col)
}
```

**Character-Based:**
- Uses `char_indices()` for UTF-8 safety
- Counts characters, not bytes (LSP requirement)
- Handles multi-byte characters correctly

## Performance Considerations

1. **Single Pass:** Code scanned once per change
2. **Sorted Output:** Tokens sorted by start position
3. **Early Exit:** Special functions detected early
4. **No Regex:** Direct byte comparisons for speed
5. **SmallVec Opportunity:** Could use SmallVec for token buffer

## Integration with Server

Called from `server.rs::semantic_tokens_full`:

```rust
let use_colors = *self.multiple_function_colors.read().unwrap();
let mgr = self.manager.read().unwrap().clone();
let tokens = extract_semantic_tokens_with_colors(text, use_colors, mgr);

Ok(Some(SemanticTokensResult::Tokens(SemanticTokens {
    result_id: None,
    data: tokens,
})))
```

## Example Highlighting

Input:
```forgescript
code: `$ping[example.com]$c[This is a comment]`
```

Tokens Generated:
```
$ping         → (0, 5, 0)   FUNCTION
example.com   → (not highlighted)
$c[...]       → (21, 47, 5) COMMENT
```

Visual Result:
- `$ping` in function color
- `[example.com]` in default color
- `$c[This is a comment]` in comment color
